Distributed Systems Fundamentals: Centralized vs. Decentralized Systems
Distributed systems are systems that consist of multiple computers that coordinate to solve a single problem. These computers communicate with each other to achieve a common goal.

Centralized systems, on the other hand, are systems in which all control and processing are done by a single computer or server.

Key differences between centralized and decentralized systems:

Control:

Centralized: All control and decision-making authority resides in a central computer or server.
Decentralized: Control and decision-making authority is distributed among multiple computers in a network.
Processing:

Centralized: All processing is done by a central computer or server.
Decentralized: Processing is distributed among multiple computers in the network.
Data:

Centralized: All data is stored on a central computer or server.
Decentralized: Data is distributed among multiple computers in the network.
Fault Tolerance:

Centralized: If the central computer or server fails, the entire system can crash.
Decentralized: If one computer fails, other computers can continue to operate the system.
Security:

Centralized: More vulnerable to attacks since all data and processing are at a central point.
Decentralized: More secure since data and processing are distributed.
Scalability:

Centralized: Can be difficult to add new users and data.
Decentralized: Easy to scale by adding new computers.
Use Cases:

Centralized: Websites, email servers, banking systems, etc.
Decentralized: Blockchain, file-sharing networks, social media platforms, etc.
Benefits of distributed systems:

Increased scalability: Can easily scale by adding more computers.
Increased reliability: If one computer fails, other computers can keep the system running.
Increased availability: System components can be located in different geographic locations.
Drawbacks of distributed systems:

Complexity: More complex to design and manage than centralized systems.
Cost: Need to purchase and manage multiple computers and software.
Security: More security risks due to multiple computers.
Distributed systems are used in a wide variety of applications, including websites, e-commerce platforms, banking systems, blockchain, and more
